README.md, before:

# Home Server Dashboard

A lightweight Go web dashboard for monitoring Docker Compose services and systemd services across multiple hosts.

![Dashboard Homepage with Search and Logs](docs/images/HomepageSearchLogs.png)

## Features

- Monitor Docker containers from Compose projects
- Monitor systemd units on local and remote hosts
- Real-time log streaming via Server-Sent Events
- Dark theme web interface with sorting and filtering
- Bang & Pipe query language for advanced filtering - [readme on that](docs/bangandpipe-query-language.md)
- Traefik integration for displaying exposed hostnames

## Requirements

- Go 1.21 or later
- Docker (for container monitoring)
- SSH access to remote hosts (for remote systemd monitoring)
- Traefik with API enabled (optional, for hostname discovery)

## Quick Start

1. Copy the sample configuration and edit it for your environment:

```bash
cp sample.services.json services.json
```

2. Edit `services.json` to define your hosts and services:

```json
{
  "hosts": [
    {
      "name": "myserver",
      "address": "localhost",
      "systemd_services": ["docker.service", "nginx.service"],
      "docker_compose_roots": ["/path/to/your/compose/projects/"]
    }
  ]
}
```

3. Build and run:

```bash
go run .
# or
go build -o nas-dashboard && ./nas-dashboard
```

4. Open http://localhost:9001 in your browser.

## Installation

Install as a systemd service:

```bash
sudo ./install.sh [username]
```

- Compiles and installs binary to `/usr/local/bin/nas-dashboard`
- Copies `services.json` (or `sample.services.json`) to `/etc/nas_dashboard/services.json`
- Installs and enables the systemd service
- `username` defaults to the user who invoked sudo

Uninstall:

```bash
sudo ./uninstall.sh
```

## How It Works

The dashboard queries Docker containers via the Docker socket and systemd units via D-Bus (for localhost) or SSH (for remote hosts). It serves a single-page web interface that fetches service status from `/api/services` and displays them in a sortable table. Clicking a service row opens an inline log viewer that streams logs in real-time using Server-Sent Events. The configuration file defines which hosts to monitor and which systemd units to track on each host. Docker Compose projects are auto-discovered by scanning the specified root directories.

## Configuration

Set `address` to `localhost` to use D-Bus for systemd queries. Any other address will use SSH with your default SSH key.

### Traefik Integration

To display Traefik-exposed hostnames as clickable links next to services, enable Traefik in your host configuration:

```json
{
  "hosts": [
    {
      "name": "myserver",
      "address": "localhost",
      "traefik": {
        "enabled": true,
        "api_port": 8080
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The dashboard queries Traefik's `/api/http/routers` endpoint to discover which services have `Host()` rules and displays them as green hostname badges. For remote hosts, it automatically tunnels through SSH to reach the Traefik API.

### Docker Labels

The dashboard reads custom labels from Docker containers to customize visibility and display:

| Label | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `home.server.dashboard.description` | Custom description displayed below service name |
| `home.server.dashboard.hidden` | Set to `true` to hide service from dashboard |
| `home.server.dashboard.ports.hidden` | Comma-separated port numbers to hide (e.g., `8080,9000`) |
| `home.server.dashboard.ports.<port>.label` | Custom label for a specific port |
| `home.server.dashboard.ports.<port>.hidden` | Set to `true` to hide a specific port |

Example:
```yaml
services:
  myapp:
    labels:
      home.server.dashboard.description: "My application"
      home.server.dashboard.ports.8080.label: "Admin Panel"
      home.server.dashboard.ports.9000.hidden: "true"
```

### Systemd Descriptions

Descriptions for systemd units are automatically fetched from the unit's `Description` field.

## Authentication

The dashboard supports optional authentication via OIDC (for external access) and PAM-based local authentication (for direct/internal access).

### OIDC Authentication

For external access through a reverse proxy, configure OIDC to authenticate users against an identity provider (e.g., Authentik, Keycloak, Auth0):

```json
{
  "oidc": {
    "service_url": "https://dashboard.example.com",
    "callback": "/oidc/callback",
    "config_url": "https://auth.example.com/application/o/myapp/.well-known/openid-configuration",
    "client_id": "your-client-id",
    "client_secret": "your-client-secret",
    "groups_claim": "groups",
    "admin_group": "admin"
  }
}
```

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `service_url` | The public URL where the dashboard is accessed |
| `callback` | OAuth2 callback path (typically `/oidc/callback`) |
| `config_url` | OIDC discovery endpoint URL |
| `client_id` | OAuth2 client ID from your identity provider |
| `client_secret` | OAuth2 client secret |
| `groups_claim` | Claim containing user groups (default: `groups`) |
| `admin_group` | Group name that grants full access (default: `admin`) |

Users must belong to the configured `admin_group` to have full access to all services.

#### OIDC Group-Based Access Control

For non-admin users, you can grant access to specific services based on OIDC group membership. This allows users to view and control only the services they're authorized for.

```json
{
  "oidc": {
    "service_url": "https://dashboard.example.com",
    "config_url": "https://auth.example.com/.well-known/openid-configuration",
    "client_id": "your-client-id",
    "client_secret": "your-client-secret",
    "groups": {
      "media-team": {
        "services": {
          "nas": ["plex", "jellyfin", "audiobookshelf"]
        }
      },
      "devops": {
        "services": {
          "nas": ["docker.service", "traefik"],
          "webserver": ["nginx.service"]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

- Each key under `groups` must match an OIDC group name exactly
- `services` maps host names to arrays of service names (Docker services or systemd units)
- Permissions are **additive**: users in multiple groups get combined access from all groups
- Users in the `admin_group` always have full access regardless of group configuration
- Group filtering applies **only to OIDC users**; local/PAM users always have full access

### Local Authentication

For direct access (when the Host header doesn't match `service_url`), users are authenticated via PAM using their system credentials:

```json
{
  "local": {
    "admins": "user1,user2"
  }
}
```

Only usernames listed in `admins` can authenticate locally. Passwords are validated against the system's PAM configuration (typically `/etc/shadow`).

**Note:** The systemd service requires `CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH` capability for PAM authentication to read shadow passwords. This is configured automatically by the install script.

### No Authentication

If neither `oidc` nor `local` sections are configured, the dashboard runs without authentication (not recommended for production).

## Service Control Setup

The dashboard can start, stop, and restart services. This requires proper authorization setup depending on whether the host is local or remote.

### Polkit Configuration (Local Host)

For local systemd service control, the dashboard uses D-Bus to communicate with systemd. D-Bus requires polkit authorization to allow non-root users to manage services.

**The install script automatically generates and installs polkit rules** to `/etc/polkit-1/rules.d/50-home-server-dashboard.rules`. This grants the dashboard user permission to start, stop, and restart only the specific systemd services defined in your `services.json`.

To regenerate polkit rules manually (e.g., after adding new services):

```bash
./nas-dashboard -generate-polkit | sudo tee /etc/polkit-1/rules.d/50-home-server-dashboard.rules
```

**Why polkit instead of sudo?** The systemd service runs with `NoNewPrivileges=true` for security hardening, which prevents using sudo. Polkit provides fine-grained authorization for D-Bus operations without requiring privilege escalation.

### SSH Key Authentication (Remote Hosts)

For remote systemd hosts, SSH key-based authentication must be configured:

```bash
# Generate an SSH key if you don't have one
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "dashboard"

# Copy the key to remote hosts
ssh-copy-id user@192.168.1.9
```

### Sudoers Configuration (Remote Hosts)

For remote hosts, systemctl commands are executed over SSH and require sudo privileges. Configure passwordless sudo for only the specific services you want to manage.

**Generate sudoers configuration automatically from your `services.json`:**

```bash
# Generate for current user
./dashboard -generate-sudoers

# Generate for a specific user
./dashboard -generate-sudoers -sudoers-user myuser
```

This outputs a sudoers configuration based on your configured systemd services. Install it with:

```bash
./dashboard -generate-sudoers | sudo tee /etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard
sudo chmod 440 /etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard
```

For remote hosts, copy the relevant lines to each remote machine's `/etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard`.

**Manual configuration** (if preferred):

On each host (local and remote), create a sudoers file:

```bash
sudo visudo -f /etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard
```

Add rules for the specific services (replace `youruser` and service names):

```sudoers
# Allow dashboard user to manage specific systemd services without password
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl start ollama.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl stop ollama.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart ollama.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl start docker.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl stop docker.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart docker.service
```

**Or use a pattern to allow all systemctl operations on specific services:**

```sudoers
# Allow start/stop/restart for specific services
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl start ollama.service, \
                             /usr/bin/systemctl stop ollama.service, \
                             /usr/bin/systemctl restart ollama.service
```

**For Docker containers**, the user running the dashboard needs to be in the `docker` group:

```bash
sudo usermod -aG docker youruser
# Log out and back in for group changes to take effect
```

### Security Considerations

- **Principle of Least Privilege**: Only grant sudo access to the specific services listed in your `services.json`
- **Avoid wildcards**: Don't use `systemctl *` patterns in sudoers
- **SSH hardening**: Consider using a dedicated SSH key for the dashboard and restricting it with `ForceCommand` if needed

## License

GPLv3

Commit message:

break up javascript into a more modular application yes, it's more complex. no, i don't care. jsx is kinder on the eyes than embedded html strings anyway. and testsing. and good seperation of concerns.

README.md, after:

# Home Server Dashboard

A lightweight Go web dashboard for monitoring Docker Compose services and systemd services across multiple hosts.

![Dashboard Homepage with Search and Logs](docs/images/HomepageSearchLogs.png)

## Features

- Monitor Docker containers from Compose projects
- Monitor systemd units on local and remote hosts
- Real-time log streaming via Server-Sent Events
- Dark theme web interface with sorting and filtering
- Bang & Pipe query language for advanced filtering - [readme on that](docs/bangandpipe-query-language.md)
- Traefik integration for displaying exposed hostnames

## Requirements

- Go 1.21 or later
- Docker (for container monitoring)
- SSH access to remote hosts (for remote systemd monitoring)
- Traefik with API enabled (optional, for hostname discovery)

## Quick Start

1. Copy the sample configuration and edit it for your environment:

```bash
cp sample.services.json services.json
```

2. Edit `services.json` to define your hosts and services:

```json
{
  "hosts": [
    {
      "name": "myserver",
      "address": "localhost",
      "systemd_services": ["docker.service", "nginx.service"],
      "docker_compose_roots": ["/path/to/your/compose/projects/"]
    }
  ]
}
```

3. Build and run:

```bash
go run .
# or
go build -o nas-dashboard && ./nas-dashboard
```

4. Open http://localhost:9001 in your browser.

## Installation

Install as a systemd service:

```bash
./install.sh [username]
```

The install script:
- Compiles and installs binary to `/usr/local/bin/nas-dashboard`
- Copies `services.json` (or `sample.services.json`) to `/etc/nas_dashboard/services.json`
- **Auto-updates config**: If your local `services.json` is newer than the installed version, it will be copied automatically
- Installs and enables the systemd service
- Generates polkit rules for local systemd service control
- `username` defaults to the current user

The script uses `sudo` internally only for commands that require it, so you don't need to run it with `sudo`. This however does mean you need sudoers access ;)

Uninstall:

```bash
./uninstall.sh
```

## How It Works

The dashboard queries Docker containers via the Docker socket and systemd units via D-Bus (for localhost) or SSH (for remote hosts). It serves a single-page web interface that fetches service status from `/api/services` and displays them in a sortable table. Clicking a service row opens an inline log viewer that streams logs in real-time using Server-Sent Events. The configuration file defines which hosts to monitor and which systemd units to track on each host. Docker Compose projects are auto-discovered by scanning the specified root directories.

## Configuration

Set `address` to `localhost` to use D-Bus for systemd queries. Any other address will use SSH with your default SSH key.

### Traefik Integration

To display Traefik-exposed hostnames as clickable links next to services, enable Traefik in your host configuration:

```json
{
  "hosts": [
    {
      "name": "myserver",
      "address": "localhost",
      "traefik": {
        "enabled": true,
        "api_port": 8080
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

The dashboard queries Traefik's `/api/http/routers` endpoint to discover which services have `Host()` rules and displays them as green hostname badges. For remote hosts, it automatically tunnels through SSH to reach the Traefik API.

### Docker Labels

The dashboard reads custom labels from Docker containers to customize visibility and display:

| Label | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `home.server.dashboard.description` | Custom description displayed below service name |
| `home.server.dashboard.hidden` | Set to `true` to hide service from dashboard |
| `home.server.dashboard.ports.hidden` | Comma-separated port numbers to hide (e.g., `8080,9000`) |
| `home.server.dashboard.ports.<port>.label` | Custom label for a specific port |
| `home.server.dashboard.ports.<port>.hidden` | Set to `true` to hide a specific port |

Example:
```yaml
services:
  myapp:
    labels:
      home.server.dashboard.description: "My application"
      home.server.dashboard.ports.8080.label: "Admin Panel"
      home.server.dashboard.ports.9000.hidden: "true"
```

### Systemd Descriptions

Descriptions for systemd units are automatically fetched from the unit's `Description` field.

## Authentication

The dashboard supports optional authentication via OIDC (for external access) and PAM-based local authentication (for direct/internal access).

### OIDC Authentication

For external access through a reverse proxy, configure OIDC to authenticate users against an identity provider (e.g., Authentik, Keycloak, Auth0):

```json
{
  "oidc": {
    "service_url": "https://dashboard.example.com",
    "callback": "/oidc/callback",
    "config_url": "https://auth.example.com/application/o/myapp/.well-known/openid-configuration",
    "client_id": "your-client-id",
    "client_secret": "your-client-secret",
    "groups_claim": "groups",
    "admin_group": "admin"
  }
}
```

| Field | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| `service_url` | The public URL where the dashboard is accessed |
| `callback` | OAuth2 callback path (typically `/oidc/callback`) |
| `config_url` | OIDC discovery endpoint URL |
| `client_id` | OAuth2 client ID from your identity provider |
| `client_secret` | OAuth2 client secret |
| `groups_claim` | Claim containing user groups (default: `groups`) |
| `admin_group` | Group name that grants full access (default: `admin`) |

Users must belong to the configured `admin_group` to have full access to all services.

#### OIDC Group-Based Access Control

For non-admin users, you can grant access to specific services based on OIDC group membership. This allows users to view and control only the services they're authorized for.

```json
{
  "oidc": {
    "service_url": "https://dashboard.example.com",
    "config_url": "https://auth.example.com/.well-known/openid-configuration",
    "client_id": "your-client-id",
    "client_secret": "your-client-secret",
    "groups": {
      "media-team": {
        "services": {
          "nas": ["plex", "jellyfin", "audiobookshelf"]
        }
      },
      "devops": {
        "services": {
          "nas": ["docker.service", "traefik"],
          "webserver": ["nginx.service"]
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

- Each key under `groups` must match an OIDC group name exactly
- `services` maps host names to arrays of service names (Docker services or systemd units)
- Permissions are **additive**: users in multiple groups get combined access from all groups
- Users in the `admin_group` always have full access regardless of group configuration
- Group filtering applies **only to OIDC users**; local/PAM users always have full access

### Local Authentication

For direct access (when the Host header doesn't match `service_url`), users are authenticated via PAM using their system credentials:

```json
{
  "local": {
    "admins": "user1,user2"
  }
}
```

Only usernames listed in `admins` can authenticate locally. Passwords are validated against the system's PAM configuration (typically `/etc/shadow`).

**Note:** The systemd service requires `CAP_DAC_READ_SEARCH` capability for PAM authentication to read shadow passwords. This is configured automatically by the install script.

### No Authentication

If neither `oidc` nor `local` sections are configured, the dashboard runs without authentication (not recommended for production).

## Service Control Setup

The dashboard can start, stop, and restart services. This requires proper authorization setup depending on whether the host is local or remote.

### Polkit Configuration (Local Host)

For local systemd service control, the dashboard uses D-Bus to communicate with systemd. D-Bus requires polkit authorization to allow non-root users to manage services.

**The install script automatically generates and installs polkit rules** to `/etc/polkit-1/rules.d/50-home-server-dashboard.rules`. This grants the dashboard user permission to start, stop, and restart only the specific systemd services defined in your `services.json`.

To regenerate polkit rules manually (e.g., after adding new services):

```bash
./nas-dashboard -generate-polkit | sudo tee /etc/polkit-1/rules.d/50-home-server-dashboard.rules
```

**Why polkit instead of sudo?** The systemd service runs with `NoNewPrivileges=true` for security hardening, which prevents using sudo. Polkit provides fine-grained authorization for D-Bus operations without requiring privilege escalation.

### SSH Key Authentication (Remote Hosts)

For remote systemd hosts, SSH key-based authentication must be configured:

```bash
# Generate an SSH key if you don't have one
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "dashboard"

# Copy the key to remote hosts
ssh-copy-id user@192.168.1.9
```

### Sudoers Configuration (Remote Hosts)

For remote hosts, systemctl commands are executed over SSH and require sudo privileges. Configure passwordless sudo for only the specific services you want to manage.

**Generate sudoers configuration automatically from your `services.json`:**

```bash
# Generate for current user
./dashboard -generate-sudoers

# Generate for a specific user
./dashboard -generate-sudoers -sudoers-user myuser
```

This outputs a sudoers configuration based on your configured systemd services. Install it with:

```bash
./dashboard -generate-sudoers | sudo tee /etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard
sudo chmod 440 /etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard
```

For remote hosts, copy the relevant lines to each remote machine's `/etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard`.

**Manual configuration** (if preferred):

On each host (local and remote), create a sudoers file:

```bash
sudo visudo -f /etc/sudoers.d/home-server-dashboard
```

Add rules for the specific services (replace `youruser` and service names):

```sudoers
# Allow dashboard user to manage specific systemd services without password
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl start ollama.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl stop ollama.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart ollama.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl start docker.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl stop docker.service
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl restart docker.service
```

**Or use a pattern to allow all systemctl operations on specific services:**

```sudoers
# Allow start/stop/restart for specific services
youruser ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/bin/systemctl start ollama.service, \
                             /usr/bin/systemctl stop ollama.service, \
                             /usr/bin/systemctl restart ollama.service
```

**For Docker containers**, the user running the dashboard needs to be in the `docker` group:

```bash
sudo usermod -aG docker youruser
# Log out and back in for group changes to take effect
```

### Security Considerations

- **Principle of Least Privilege**: Only grant sudo access to the specific services listed in your `services.json`
- **Avoid wildcards**: Don't use `systemctl *` patterns in sudoers
- **SSH hardening**: Consider using a dedicated SSH key for the dashboard and restricting it with `ForceCommand` if needed

## License

GPLv3
